.\" Originally written by Jan Schaumann
.\" <jschauma@netmeister.org> in April 2020.
.Dd June 16, 2022
.Dt gip 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm gip
.Nd get an IP in a desired CIDR
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl 46UVachruv
.Op Fl d Ar dir
.Ar country|reserved|cidr
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
tool lets you grab an IP address or CIDR subnet that
belongs to the given CIDR or a geographical location
as derived from external sources of truth.
.Pp
The selection is made at random from the given input.
This can be useful to test systems that behave
differently based on e.g., the geographical location
of the client address or to verify how it may handle
certain reserved IP space.
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported by
.Nm :
.Bl -tag -width _d_dir_
.It Fl 4
Only return IPv4 results.
.It Fl 6
Only return IPv6 results.
.It Fl a
When using
.Fl r ,
check all countries.
(By default,
.Nm
will only print the first matching country assignment,
assuming that a netblock is not assigned to multiple
countries.)
.It Fl U
Do not update local files.
.It Fl V
Print version number and exit.
.It Fl c
Return a CIDR subnet instead of an IP address.
.It Fl d Ar dir
Use the given directory to store CIDR data.
If not specified, default to ~/.gip.
.It Fl h
Display help and exit.
.It Fl r
Reverse lookup (IP or CIDR to RFC or CC).
.It Fl u
Update local files from their remote sources of truth.
.It Fl v
Be verbose.
Can be specified multiple times.
.El
.Sh DETAILS
.Nm
takes as argument a
.Ar country ,
.Ar reservation description ,
or a
.Ar CIDR
and will attempt to produce an IP address that matches
those requirements.
By default,
.Nm
will attempt to find both an IPv4 and an IPv6 address,
but will only print one or the other if only that is
available.
.Pp
A country can be specified as:
.Bl -tag -width aws_region_
.It aws-region
An AWS region.
For example, 'eu-west-1'.
.Nm
will also accept e.g. 'eu-west' and then pick one of
the matching regions at random.
.It CC
An ISO-3166-1 Alpha-2 country code.
For example, 'de' for Germany.
For most countries, this will be their ccTLD;
.Nm
also accepts 'uk' for Great Britain, as well as 'eu'
to let it pick a random country from the European
Union, but
.Nm
will not accept IDN ccTLDs.
.It country
An English country name.
For example, 'Germany'.
For countries with a name consisting of multiple
words, make sure to quote this argument.
.El
.Pp
A reservation description can be specified as
.Bl -tag -width reserved_
.It rfcXXXX
.Nm
will provide a result from the given RFC reserved IP
space.
For example, specifying "RFC1918" may yield an address
in the 10.0.0.0/8 CIDR.
.Pp
The RFCs
.Nm
is aware of are: RFC1112, RFC1122, RFC1918, RFC2544,
RFC2928, RFC3056, RFC3068, RFC3849, RFC4193, RFC4380,
RFC4843, RFC5180, RFC5737, RFC6052, RFC6333, RFC6598,
RFC6666, and RFC6890.
.It symbolic
.Nm
accepts the following symbolic names for several of
the RFC reserved CIDRs: benchmarking, example,
link-local, loopback, multicast, namecollision,
unique-local, unspecified.
.It reserved
Specifying the literal string "reserved" causes
.Nm
to pick an address from any one of the CIDRs that are
not suitable for public communications.
.El
.Pp
Note: When selecting an IP address from a CIDR,
.Nm
will only expand small CIDRs.
That is, if a given source CIDR ends up being larger
than a /120 vor IPv6 or a /16 for IPv4, then
.Nm
will grab an IP address from the first /120 or /16
within the given CIDR.
.Sh REVERSE LOOKUPS
If the
.Fl r
flag is specified,
.Nm
will attempt to do the reverse and tell you what CC or
reservation the given CIDR belongs to.
.Pp
This can take a moment, as
.Nm
has to parse all CC and AWS CIDRs.
Likewise,
.Nm
will need to fetch the CC mappings following the same
logic as for forward lookups (see the
.Fl U
flag), but of course here we are talking about over
200 CIDR maps.
.Pp
To cut down on the time spent here,
.Nm
will stop the lookup on the first matching CIDR,
operating under the assumption that neither AWS, nor
IANA assigns netblocks to multiple regions
simultaneously.
.Pp
If you want to ensure that all CIDRs are checked, pass
the
.Fl a
flag.
.Sh GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION
.Nm
will attempt to determine an IP range for the given
country argument by retrieving sources of truth to map
your input.
These sources of truth include:
.Bl -tag -width cidrs_
.nf
.It AWS
The IP ranges published by AWS at:
.nh
https://ip-ranges.amazonaws.com/ip-ranges.json
.It CIDRs
Address blocks by CIDR from:
.nh
https://github.com/herrbischoff/country-ip-blocks
.El
.fi
.Pp
.Nm
will look for these input files in the directory
~/.gip.
If no files are found, or the files found are older
than 7 days, or if the
.Fl u
flag is specified,
.Nm
will attempt to fetch these files.
This can be disabled by specifying the
.Fl U
flag.
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following examples illustrate common usage of this tool.
.Pp
To get an IP address presumed to be in Germany:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
gip germany
.Ed
.Pp
To get an IPv6 CIDR for the AWS region 'sa-east-1'
without updating the local data files regardless of
age:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
gip -U -6 -c sa-east-1
.Ed
.Pp
To verbosely get an IPv4 address presumed to be in
Czechia:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
gip -v -v -4 "Czech Republic"
.Ed
.Pp
To get an IP address suitable to be used in
documentation:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
gip example
.Ed
.Pp
To select a random IP from the 203.0.113.0/24 network:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
gip -4 203.0.113.0/24
.Ed
.Pp
To select a random subnet of the given 2001:db8::/32:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
gip -c 2001:db8::/32
.Ed
.Pp
To look up the location of the address
2406:dafc:2000::2916:d9e5:2aac:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
gip -r 2406:dafc:2000::2916:d9e5:2aac
.Ed
.Sh FILES
.Nm
keeps copies of the data it looked up in the directory
~/.gip.  In there, it will store the files:
.Bl -tag -width _version___cc_cidr_
.It ip-ranges.json
The list of IP ranges published by AWS.
.It <version>/<cc>.cidr
The per country code CIDRs.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std 
.Sh SEE ALSO
https://xkcd.com/195/
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
was originally written by
.An Jan Schaumann
.Aq jschauma@netmeister.org
in April 2020.
.Sh BUGS
Please file bugs and feature requests by emailing the author.
